---
title: "The Challenge of Achieving Attributability in Multilingual Table-to-Text
  Generation with Question-Answer Blueprints"
date: 2025-03-29T20:04:00Z
authors: "Aden Haussmann"
arxiv_id: "2503.23204v1"
pdf: "http://arxiv.org/pdf/2503.23204v1"
topic: "machine translation"
---

Multilingual Natural Language Generation (NLG) is challenging due to the lack of training data for low-resource languages. However, some low-resource languages have up to tens of millions of speakers globally, making it important to improve NLG tools for them. Table-to-Text NLG is an excellent measure of models' reasoning abilities but is very challenging in the multilingual setting. System outputs are often not attributable, or faithful, to the data in the source table. Intermediate planning techniques like Question-Answer (QA) blueprints have been shown to improve attributability on summarisation tasks. This work explores whether QA blueprints make multilingual Table-to-Text outputs more attributable to the input tables. This paper extends the challenging multilingual Table-to-Text dataset, TaTA, which includes African languages, with QA blueprints. Sequence-to-sequence language models are then finetuned on this dataset, with and without blueprints. Results show that QA blueprints improve performance for models finetuned and evaluated only on English examples, but do not demonstrate gains in the multilingual setting. This is due to inaccuracies in machine translating the blueprints from English into target languages when generating the training data, and models failing to rely closely on the blueprints they generate. An in-depth analysis is conducted on why this is challenging.
