---
title: "Analysis of the accuracy of GNSS inferred precipitable water vapour
  against that from a 210 GHz WVR at the H.E.S.S. site"
date: 2025-05-08T15:33:24Z
authors: "Lott Frans, Michael Backes, Heino Falcke, Tiziana Venturi"
arxiv_id: "2505.05346v1"
pdf: "http://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.05346v1"
topic: "sentiment analysis"
---

The High Energy Stereoscopic System (H.E.S.S.) site and the Gamsberg Mountain have been identified as potential sites for the Africa Millimetre Telescope (AMT). The AMT is poised to observe at millimetre and possibly at submillimetre wavelengths. At these wavelengths, precipitable water vapour (PWV) in the atmosphere is the main source of opacity during observations and therefore needs to be accurately assessed at the potential sites for the AMT. In order to investigate the PWV conditions for the AMT, identical Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) stations were installed and used to assess the PWV at the two potential sites. In this study, the accuracy of those PWV measurements by the GNSS stations was assessed by comparing the H.E.S.S. installed GNSS station PWV measurements to that from a 210 GHz Water Vapour Radiometer (WVR) also installed at the H.E.S.S. site. A correlation of 98% and an offset of 0.34 mm was found between the GNSS station and the 210 GHz WVR PWV data when on-site pressure and the Nevada Geodetic Laboratory (NGL) weighted mean temperature ($\mathrm{T_m}$) were used calculate the GNSS station PWV data. In comparison, the offset reduces to 0.15 mm when on-site derived $\mathrm{T_m}$ and pressure were used to calculate the GNSS station PWV. The results show that the GNSS station with on-site meteorological data can be used with high accuracy to reliably determine the PWV conditions at the H.E.S.S. site.
