---
title: "A comparative analysis of GNSS-inferred precipitable water vapour at the
  potential sites for the Africa Millimetre Telescope"
date: 2025-05-08T14:59:40Z
authors: "Lott Frans, Michael Backes, Heino Falcke, Tiziana Venturi"
arxiv_id: "2505.05310v1"
pdf: "http://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.05310v1"
topic: "sentiment analysis"
---

The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) is a network of antennas across the globe currently used to image super-massive black holes (SMBHs) at a frequency of 230 GHz. Since the release of the image of M87$^\ast$ in 2019 and, subsequently, that of Sgr A$^\ast$ in 2022 by the EHT collaboration, the focus has shifted to dynamically imaging SMBHs. This has led to a search for potential sites to extend and fill in the gaps within the EHT network. The Gamsberg Mountain and the H.E.S.S. site are both located within the Khomas highlands and have been identified as potential sites for the Africa Millimetre Telescope (AMT). Precipitable water vapour (PWV) in the atmosphere is the main source of opacity and noise from atmospheric emissions when observing at millimetre to sub-millimetre wavelengths. This study aims to establish the PWV content and the atmospheric transmission at 86, 230, and 345 GHz at the AMT potential sites using Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) derived PWV data. Results show both sites have potential for observations at 86 and 230 GHz, with 345 GHz possible at the Gamsberg Mountain during winter. The overall median PWV of 14.27 mm and 9.25 mm was calculated at the H.E.S.S. site and the Gamsberg Mountain, respectively. The EHT window had PWV medians of 16.62 mm and 11.20 mm at the H.E.S.S. site and Gamsberg Mountain, respectively. Among the two sites, the Gamsberg Mountain had the lowest PWV conditions, therefore making it the most suitable site for the AMT.
